---
title: "Funk Generator"
date: 2018-05-07T16:47:11-03:00
---

This post describes a language model that I have created for generating funk
lyrics. This is a popular music genre in Brazil, I have created a medium post in
portuguese describing the process of collecting the data and generating the
songs. Therefore, my motivation in this posts is to explain how I created this
model and discuss some decisions I have made during the development of this
project.


## Word Embeddings

I have not used any portuguese pre-trained word embedding for this problem. The
main rationale behind this decisions is that most portuguese word embeddings
that I know are trained with the wikipedia corpus. Although they provide a rich
set of words and context for those words, I don't believe they would make my
model significantly better. The reason for that is that my main source of
information, the funk lyrics, are vastly different than wikipedia
articles. Therefore, I have not used pre-trained embeddings, but I have not
excluded this option from future experiments.

## Input formatting

I removed all punctuation and words that not appear at least 5 times in my
dataset from my dataset. Furthermore, I split the songs into chunks of 32 words,
and I have used these chunks as the training data of my model.

Additionally, I have added special tokens in the beginning and ending of my
songs, while replacing any word that doesn't appear in my vocabulary for a token
representing an unknown word.

## Model

I have used a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) to train the model with an LSTM cell for
generating the state vector of the RNN. I have stacked 3 of this layers
together, where each layer has 728 units.

Furthermore I have used dropout for regularizing my network. I have applied
dropout to the recurrent step of my network, using the variational recurrent
dropout technique [1], and I have applied dropout to the output of my RNNs.
Also, I have applied dropout to the embeddings matrix as well, as stated in the
variational dropout paper [1]. I have used the value of 0.5 as the probability
mask for the described dropout approaches.

I have also tried to use L2 regularization in my model, but I have found that it
added a heavy burden on the model capacity, so I decided to remove that type of
regularization.

Finally, I have used the weight tying technique [2] to remove the necessity of
maintaining two distinct embedding matrices in my model.

## Model validation

I have decided not to use a validation or a test set for this task. The main
reason behind that initially, when I used a validation and test set, I was
looking at the perplexity metric to understand if my model was overfitting.
However, I realized that this metric did not have a good correlation with the
songs my model was generating. Meaning that the quality of my songs was not
getting better if my perplexity value was decreasing. I realized that using the
whole dataset to train the model achieved a better overall quality of the songs
being produced.

However, I must add that using the validation and test set was a really good
choice on the first steps of the project, since I used these sets to define the
number of RNN to use, the size of units in these networks, and that L2
regularization was not giving me benefits.

Finally, I must add that the way I was evaluating if a song was good or not was
totally subjective. I believe this a problem, since this made my decision making
problem a lot harder in this project. If I start any language modelling problem
again, I will invest a great deal of time on this subject, to understand a
better way to evaluate sentences generated by the model.

## Production

Since I wanted to deploy this model in production, I have considered using
TensorFlow Serving[3] for this task. However, I realized that this not an
appropriate choice for this task, since I would need to generate a number of
requests for the server, in order to keep generating new words, which was not
ideal.

Therefore, I have created a docker container using both flask and gunicorn to
serve the application. Although the contained I have generated is really big
(more that 1.5g), I think that this will not be a major problem, since I am not
aiming at scalability here. However, using external volumes for the model
checkpoint, instead of including it in the container should provide a better
alternative than the one I took.

## Conclusion

This was I really hard problem for me to solve. Not only collecting the data
took a lot of time, my decision making process was not as good as it seems. I
believe that this project, although successful, made me realize some problems in
using Deep Learning with Natural Language Processing, which is that finding the
right metric to optimize is a real difficult task.

But with that difficult I am now motivated to further research into this topic
and better understand how other people or research groups have handled this
issue.


## Referências

* [1: Variational Dropout for RNNs](https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.05287)
* [2: Weight Tying](https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.05859)
* [3: TensorFlow Serving](https://www.tensorflow.org/serving/)
